of technology through innovation development,
and in greater extent developing the future of the nation.
So I have here a short video on
how Singapore plan their innovation,
how Singapore utilizes innovation to advance
the civilization, the society, the way of living
of, uh, Singaporeans and the residents of the country,
and how they want to see the future.
So I have here a short video, how Singapore
planned their future, set their future,
and create their future.
Singapore's digital journey is about asking what's next?
How can we build tomorrow with the tools of today?
How can we use technology to make the impossible a reality
and do this in a cleaner, greener way?
This is what Punal digital District stands for.
A campus designed to create our future as a smart nation,
a future for all of us.
Imagine having data
of the entire district at your fingertips.
It's now possible with the open digital platform,
Through Its digital twin ODP also unlocks new
possibilities for innovation.
Tech companies can plug into this virtual world
to access the district data experiment
and test fit solutions before showcasing it live.
At PDD. What if the future
of learning is not confined to the classroom at PDD?
Experiential and authentic learning comes to life
as we transform our campus into a living lab for students,
businesses, and the community.
This unparalleled proximity
to industry will bring about synergies like never before.
Youth have incredible diversity
and perspectives as they reimagine our world.
We hope to empower them to be ready for the digital future.
PDD is a nexus for the brightest minds in tech to connect
and collaborate on the next big innovation.
So we are excited to be part of this vibrant ecosystem
and help you bridge the gap between dreams and action
At Pungo Digital District. The future.
The future. The future is yours to discover,
Yours to imagine yours to transform.
The future is yours to create.
Alright, So as you've seen from the video,
Singapore utilizes, uh, technology to develop their future.
So they believe that, uh, technology will empower the future
of their society
because, uh, they look into it as a way
to advance their civilization
and to advance the development of, uh, uh,
the economic economy of the country.
The, uh, what we call it, the improvement of,
uh, livelihood of the community.
And then they also look into what we call, uh, virtual
simulations of the, uh, environment wherein, uh,
various players of the industry can participate.
So they can simulate the impact
of developing infrastructure, uh, in a particular area.
They can do some sort of a twin tower development,
how this development will implicate the
community as a whole.
And then they also try to simulate
how education can be done in a remote fashion.
Meaning the learning will not only
be confined in the four corners of the classroom,
but also in the outside the campus.
So that's how they want to perceive, uh, their society,
how they want to advance their, uh,
development into that context.
So with that, the, the technology itself, the, the test bed
that they're using is, uh,
I can say it is 50 years in advance.
So that is how they plan the future.
So they create the future they want to be,
they create the future that they want to see.
So it is not just a, uh, reactive on a given situation,
but they create an opportunity for them so
that they will be ready when it time, uh, it comes.
So the underlying of all of this technology, uh, is
what we call first the context of the internet of things.
So the internet of things as, uh,
just some sort of an introduction.
So it is a, uh, a technology.
We are in a machine, communicate to each other
and communicate to other elements in the eco,
in the ecosystem.
So this includes human
and then also the, uh, the machines talking to a machine,
and then people talking to the, the infrastructure itself.
Okay? So that is the backbone of all of this, uh, smart city
or smart development.
So also when we look into components
or of the elements of the I OT technology, so they have, uh,
this, uh, event driven context.
So event driven context.
Technically, the, uh, the system itself is, uh, driven by
the changes on the environment.
Technically, for example, there is a changes in temperature.
So therefore the system will
respond on the sudden changes on the temperature.
And then, uh, for example, they notice
that the temperature in the office is not anymore conducive
for the people working there.
So they will adjust the temperature conducive for them.
So, because, uh, there's a lot of, uh, uh, study
that when the people are not, uh, comfortable
with the workplace, so they tend to do some other things.
So they may, uh, take a break longer breaks
or reducing their productivity.
So this is all parts of what we call smart, uh, ecosystem.
And then, uh, they are also sensitive to the context,
technically context
or on the, uh, area they are,
uh, sensitive.
So aside from the temperature, we,
we can also look on the motion.
And then, uh, if it is in the, uh,
industrial application, so we can look into, uh,
sensitive on, uh, some type of gases
that are flammable in nature.
So if this sensor detect this kind of flammable, uh, gases,
the sensor will, uh, activate the, uh,
environment in a sense that it'll, uh, flush out this,
uh, kind of gases.
This is to prevent any damages inside the laboratory
that may cause, uh, the lives
of the people working in the particular industry.
And then also they have this, uh, uh,
flexibility of the, the structure.
So meaning they can scale up and scale down the system.
So that makes the, uh, the smart system
or smart city development, uh, a more,
uh, we call it robust.
Then we also have a semantic sharing.
So nowadays, you don't need to be worried about the,
uh, manufacturer.
You don't need to be worried about, uh,
who developed the technology,
because nowadays they have this,
what we call the standardization.
So with the standardization, we can say
that the devices can communicate
and talk to each other seamlessly.
And then also they have this last component,
complex access, uh, technology.
So technically this is, uh, the, uh, the power consumption
of all of this, uh, uh, technology
because, you know, the, the one who powers all
of this technology is the, uh, uh,
the power source itself,
because, uh, the more complex the machine,
the more power it requires.
But we also need
to develop some sophistications on their power sources.
So that's why they have this, uh, development
of energy in terms of, uh, for example,
improvement the battery life of the IO OT
in a given, uh, environment, or for example, in the farm.
So they make sure that the battery life there will,
will last, okay, uh, as expected, right?
So all of these are the characteristics of this, uh, iot
as a backbone of the,
the smart city development and moving
So when we apply all of this in various industries,
so we can develop at what we call intelligent system,
and this intelligent system can communicate to each other,
making us more connected, making us more engaged,
whether you are in the manufacturing,
whether you are in the retail or in the, uh, medical field.
So we can easily engage each other technically.
I, for example, now I am in Hong Kong,
so I can engage you there in the Philippines
to provide you some, uh, perspectives
and views of the IT practitioner, uh, on
how you could apply all of this,
either in your research area
or in the, uh, sharing of, uh, what we call the experience
so that our students will have a more relevant
and responsive skillset
once they graduate in the university.
All right? So I, OT
and smart system, so the components of that are three.
So technically the first one is the sensor.
So from the word sensor, it is the one sensing
the environment.
So capturing all of those parameters.
So these parameters can be the form of, uh, liquid, okay?
Gas motion.
So all of those parameters, these parameters are fed
to the system for processing.
And then after that, we have connectivity.
So this is the communication line.
So how the data is transmitted from the sensing edge
to the processing system.
So this can be in the form of wire or wireless system.
And of course, inside the connectivity, you have
to consider also the type of, uh, networks
that you will be using.
So it can be in 5G or LTE
or wifi, Bluetooth.
So it depends on the application,
but technically in general, they are connectivity.
And then on the last part, you have the processes.
So technically this is the, the system,
the computing system, and the people using, using it.
So they are the one who developing the dashboard,
providing a, a more meaningful insight to the management so
that the man management can provide some, uh,
substantial support to develop all of this, uh,
smart technology.
Okay? So as, uh, I mentioned a while ago,
the sensors are those, uh, devices
that captures environmental data.
So this one can be in the form as mentioned,
it can be in the form of, uh, uh, gases or a position
or, uh, acceleration.
Okay? And then magnetic field.
So all of these are part of the sensing capabilities,
because sensor nowadays are becoming more
and more advanced, unlike before.
So technically the sensor last time is just a matter of,
uh, on and off switch.
So if I detect something, I know it is off.
If not, it is on something like that.
So nowadays, it is different.
So they can detect, if they can detect specific amount
of gas, and they know that it doesn't reach the threshold,
they will not do something because it doesn't reach the
critical, the critical can be in a sense
that it can create more damage already.
All right? So that's how sensing capabilities are,
uh, advanced nowadays.
All right. So for the connectivity, as I mentioned,
it can be in the form of wire or wireless,
and depending also on the scope, okay?
So if it is, for example, your devices talking to
another devices in a short distance, it can be
a personal area network.
So meaning to say it can be in the form of Bluetooth,
so just a small range.
Then if it is a more higher range, it can be a land setting.
Okay? So wider, that is the man setting, then
one, okay?
So under the one, you have various types,
you have the lower one, okay?
So there are so many variations.
And then after that, you have the, uh, LTE,
the four, G, 5G, and the satellite communication.
So it depends on the application of the, uh,
smart system and right for the people and processes.
So this comprises of, for example, we have the, uh,
analytics, okay?
And then some, uh, uh, customer management solution.
So all of these technically are providing, uh,
computational, uh, processes,
and then the people using the system will be able
to develop some dashboard.
And then this dashboard can be used
by the management for decision making.
And technically, they use it for an insight,
because normally what the management wants is, uh,
to see a glimpse of the future so
that they can develop something
before the future happen, right?
Okay. So as I mentioned a while ago, IO OT comprises of
a machine to machine, okay?
Or things talking to things,
and then also a things talking to people.
And now this includes also a data, right?
So a data, okay, uh, can communicate also
to the machine, okay?
Through we call, uh, what we call this, uh,
uh, an AI driven approach, okay?
And then when we combine all of this, it can be
what we call the internet of everything.
So it is a combinations of people to people, people
to machine and machine to machine communication.
So it is already what we call an ecosystem, uh,
an alternative ecosystem of the machine, of the human
and of the data interacting to each other,
developing a more complex, sophisticated
and intelligent
environment, okay?
And then, uh, the interactions between these entities
are creating new types of smart applications
and services, so, which we already know.
So for example, uh, developing, uh, an application in,
for example, a smart car park solution or car park system.
So you could develop an IOT, uh, technology there wherein,
uh, all the parking space have the sensing capability.
So if the, the sensor connecting the top
and the bottom is being blocked, so technically there is,
uh, a car parking there already, so signifying
that the block is already occupied, right?
So as a commuter, so you know, which parking area
or parking space still have a slot for you to,
to park your car.
So this creates something like an inside.
So it creates something like a, a more, uh,
productive time on your end.
So no need just to go there.
And then at the end of the day, you cannot find any
parking space for you.
All right? And then also you have here a, uh, a system
that develops your day-to-day activity,
so it can detect your number of steps taken every day,
your heart rate, your pulse rate.
So all of this creates what we call a a, an insight, okay?
So this data can, can, can develop something like, uh,
an information for your doctor to see your, uh,
we call it health information, right?
So whether or not, uh, the doctor can advise you to do
more exercise or to, to reduce some, uh, food intake.
So this is a more what we call proactive, uh,
approach, okay?
Because at the end of the day, the, the idea
of this smart system is to, uh, provide more,
uh, advancement in terms of quality of life,
and to, of course, to prevent loss of,
uh, property, damage of property,
and of course loss of life.
So that is the technical essence of smart development.
All right? And then as for the applications
and services, so you could look into different, uh,
classifications and examples of IOT by
scale and by the, uh, network range.
So for example, you have a, a body area network typed, okay?
So the type of network there would be a personal area
network, meaning the machine is talking
to another machine using a Bluetooth, right?
Because the, the communication range
of Bluetooth is much smaller than the wifi.
So technically you use, uh, this to measure your
body temperature, humidity,
your pulse rate, et cetera, right?
But if you enlarge the size, okay?
So making it a more bigger in, in, in, in scale.
So it can be in the form of, uh,
activity monitoring in a given area.
For example, it is a, uh, a basketball court,
so you could see how the players move, okay?
And then if you expand it more
so you could apply it into a smart house
wherein the house would have a different, uh, level, right?
So level one, level two, level three,
but all of them can be captured, okay?
And then you expand that more.
So you can apply that one in the field of agriculture
livestock monitoring.
So you could see what is happening to your cows,
where are they, what are they eating, okay?
And then also in the smart grid.
And then putting that one more bigger,
you have the transportation and logistic.
So you can see where your, uh, deliveries are coming, okay?
When, when, and when they will be coming.
And then to expand that more.
So you have a tsunami detection.
So meaning, uh, it is assure, okay?
So, uh, it, it takes more,
uh, distance coverage.
So that is how it, uh, applies
to this kind of application.
So technically, if you will look at it, uh,
it is more on getting information
and to develop a more proactive approach to manage all
of those resources in our advantage in
creating a more sustainable
and more beneficial to us human in general.
Okay? All right.
And then for the application,
so you have here the smart cities.
So we, wherein you can manage the resources utilizes
by the cities, okay?
So because in small city, you have to utilize
the consumption, so
how much people consume in one city, okay?
And also if there is a consumption,
there is also waste generated.
So what will you do with this, uh,
waste generated in the cities?
Do you have a sufficient facilities to dispose all
of this waste generated?
And together with the energy they require, they need?
So technically developing a city is not just building homes,
but also you need to develop a system that will enable
what we call sustainable development.
Okay? And then another application is the smart environment.
So this one is creating a more, uh, infrastructure,
creating more, uh, technology that are, uh,
environment friendly.
Okay? So for example, in in Singapore, we have here
a plastic that are, uh,
disintegrate in a given period of time.
So let's say, as far as I know, we have here a plastic bag
that can disintegrate within 60 days.
So you see the plastic here can decompose,
meaning they become bri,
and it it become like a paper, right?
Unlike in the Philippines,
the plastic there would last forever.
So that this is how they, they make a material, uh,
a more user friendly, okay?
And also, uh, for example, they, they use here, okay?
In, in Singapore also, one of the, uh, part
of the sustainability they have
is all the trashes in Singapore are, uh, incinerated,
but incineration is banned in the Philippines.
But in Singapore it is not.
How, because they, they do it in a different way.
It is that just dumping outside and then burn it there?
No, in Singapore, they, they do it in different way.
So they have his, uh, there, uh, under, uh,
underground incineration.
So they burn all of this material.
And then, uh, there are two byproducts here.
So the first one is the, the solids.
So those, uh, materials are used, used in construction.
So they use those material,
the byproduct in construction, okay?
They use it in the parks.
They use it for repairing some other, uh,
minor infrastructure there in Singapore.
And then also the other byproduct there is the heat.
So the heat generated there, uh, they use it
to power the turbine to, to generate energy, right?
And then the smoke, they process it farther so
that the smoke will become less, okay?
Less, uh, uh, the impact to this, to the environment.
So technically there is negligible, okay?
Because in the Philippines, the smoke,
when you burn become black, white, uh, black, right?
But in Singapore it is white. So that is how they do it.
So they are developing technology so that the impact
of those technology in the environment is less, okay?
And then smart energy.
So smart energy in, in Europe, they have this, uh,
uh, we call it, uh, energy sharing.
Okay? So what does it mean?
In, in Europe, uh, they have this grid, okay?
They have European union, they have this common grid.
So for example, France develop energy
or produce energy more than they need.
So the excess energy can be exported to other
European union country, okay?
So to ensure that the other European country can have also,
uh, an energy source to, to power their economy.
So that is how they work.
So, so there is a no waste stage of energy
because the energy will not last forever.
So the excess energy should be utilized
by other member state, okay?
So that is how they do it, okay? Smart agriculture.
So you utilizing technology
to produce products in, in the whole year, okay?
So unlike in the Philippines, right?
So we do have season, but in other countries,
they can have those particular products whole year round.
Why? Because they can control the environment
to make this products
or, uh, foods available all year round.
And then eHealth. So the utilizing technology
to monitor your vitals, okay?
To, to measure all of those critical vitals needed for your,
uh, for example, your survival itself, your health, okay?
So they, they have this, uh, technology to your body,
and then this, uh, uh, data are posted to the cloud,
and then this information can be viewed by your doctor,
so the doctor can see a more advanced, uh, findings.
So that can provide a more, uh,
preventive measure than a reactive,
because if it is reactive, so the damage has been done,
but if it is a preventive, so it is more sustainable
because it prevents things to happen, right?
And then in the field of re retail, so it, the utilizing iot
in terms of, uh, consumption.
So how much people consume in a particular city.
So they can do what we call projection.
So if this product consume, okay, using data analytics,
I know how many items
or product do I need to produce in the coming months
or season, right?
Then together with the logistics.
So logistics is a partner of retails.
So how many, uh, uh, truck ban will I need
to deploy so that all of those items
produced can be delivered
to the respective destination, right?
And then industrial control.
So industrial control, these are the, uh, what we call, uh,
uh, an iot
or intelligence system in a critical infrastructure.
So these are the, uh, infrastructure that are, uh,
in the power, okay?
Power generation in communication system.
So, so they need to, to ensure that all
of these are taken care of,
because imagine if your critical
infrastructure is compromised.
So it will, for example, it downs your communication system.
So what will happen then?
So, okay, uh, in the, in the airport, for example,
if your communication power is down, so plane cannot go out
and go into your country
because they cannot see who's going down and going up.
So it can, it might cause a collision, right?
So the same thing with the iot.
So they need to ensure that there is a proper, uh, a system
to, uh, ensure con communication, connectivity,
and of course, and insight so
that the traffic controller can mitigate, uh,
any collision, any accident that may happen.
So that is only in the, uh, in the airport.
So you also have the, the ports in harbo.
So you, Pierre, so how many ships are coming in,
coming out, okay?
And then the, the, the size of the ship, right?
So, so they, the, the need to anticipate that.
So, but with the power of iot
and data analytics, so they know when they will come,
when they need to push out, right?
So it is a matter of, uh,
intelligent solution, okay?
For the smart home. So for example, you have here, uh,
an IOT system
or an intelligent system in general, so you can, can control
what is happening inside your homes, right?
So for example, there is no one at home, so
the lights will be off automatically,
but if the system detects
that there is someone walking there, so it detects
that there is a motion, therefore the light will be
on, right?
So something like that. And then if your grandparents, uh,
strip, okay?
And then fall. So the system will send notification
to the family members that there is something happen, okay?
Some accident happen at home.
So they can immediately call 9 1 1 to do, uh,
a rescue or a, any, uh,
advance, uh, we call it rescue if needed.
Okay? So all of this,
and at the end of the day, what you will see here is that,
uh, it reduce energy consumption, right?
Because if there is none there, no one is there.
So energy consumption will be lower, right? Okay.
Okay. For the smart home, again,
another application is your fridge, okay?
In other countries, I've seen this one in Europe, okay?
So in the fridge, so there are sensors there.
So, so can, they can measure, okay, how many, uh, meat left,
how many eggs left there, how many vegetable left there,
and then all of this information is sent
to the app, to the apps.
And then the apps can be viewed by the, the, uh, the parents
or the mother, because normally the mother is the one buying
them to the groceries after office.
So with this, uh, technology, smart technology, so they
need not to go to the fridge and check one by one.
So by the apps itself, they can see, right?
So making a, uh, grocery more, uh,
easy, okay?
And then more, uh, we call it, um, appropriate.
So meaning to say it avoids overstocking
because for example, you don't have idea.
So you thought that there are no more eggs.
So, but actually there's still a lot, right?
So if you buy, again, it overstock, right?
And then some means spoil, right?
So, so this is one of those, uh, advantages
of technology, okay?
And then also in Singapore, I just want
to share something, okay?
In general here, as I mentioned a while ago, it, it helps
the, the government manage their resources.
Okay? So managing resources includes energy, okay?
Building a more, uh, friendly community
or homes, okay?
Providing a more responsive, uh, support
to the community itself.
So for example, if they need, uh, police assistance,
it can be easily, uh, provided, okay?
And then, uh, the government also here provides, uh,
uh, what we call, as mentioned earlier, right?
Uh, provides a more conducive environment for
working in the case of the office.
But in, in, in Singapore, they also monitor
the air flow, okay?
In a given community.
That's why in Singapore, you seldom see
that the building is attached to another building
and then attached to another building,
making it the air difficult to flow through.
Okay? So, so in, in Singapore, they also plant
that including the sunrise, the sunset, the heat,
uh, direction.
They plan everything, okay?
Because they know, uh, when, when all of this is, uh,
put into place, they create a more, uh, friendly community
because they are not, uh, they are more or less stressed.
We can say that. Okay?
So I have in some video for you to look into how
Singapore manages all of these resources.
All right? So you can see from the video, right?
That, uh, the Singapore government manages all of this, uh,
uh, resources.
So electrical consumption, right?
So you see from the video, the, the light is also, uh,
activated on a given period, right?
And then also they deem the light, okay?
So if needed to,
and then also with the use of technology, you can see, uh,
what is happening to your parents at home, right?
So if they doing some, uh, rec corporation activity together
with the, uh, remote, uh, consultant, right?
So you can see, okay, so the checkup has been completed.
So something like that. So it gives more, uh, peace
of mind on the end of the, the, the children, right?
Okay. So, so this is, uh, how it works.
And then another point that I want to raise there, you see,
uh, they utilizes, uh, technology in, uh,
infrastructure monitoring
or, uh, building health monitoring
so they can see if the building's still in a good condition.
So if there is a crop, so what is the impact of the crop
to the overall structure of the building, right?
Do they need the repair or do they need to do what?
So something like that, so that in the next development,
they know what to do so
that the same event will not happen again, right?
And then another point, they also utilizing technology
in smart urban planning, right?
So that is, I believe one of the important thing
that we need to incorporate in the Philippines,
or even in the field of teaching.
So smart urban planning,
because that's, uh, uh,
very vol thing if we don't include.
So if you develop a city in a place that is, that suitable
for city development,
so it will create more damage than benefits.
Okay? All right.
So we have smart cars.
So I think this one is self-explanatory
because there's a lot of applications nowadays in the
Philippines, right?
To, to provide you, uh, a navigation, right?
So we will just key in your destination
and then automatically detect your current location,
and then after that, you just follow it, right?
So it is in, in ways, right? So in the Philippines, okay?
And then also aside from that, in Singapore, they also,
uh, already explore the, uh, what we call smart,
uh, car or the autonomous vehicle,
although it is not yet, uh, in production.
But they already have this proof of concept utilized this
in, uh, one of the campus in Singapore University campus,
that is the Nanyang Technological University.
So they, uh, employ this autonomous vehicle nside the campus premise, okay?
So they have this autonomous bus service.
So this bus service is only in the campus of the NTU,
but prior to that, uh, they do have this, uh, uh,
evaluation, okay?
Test evaluation, how they can employ this, uh,
technology, okay?
In, in this, uh, area.
So actually it was tested by some of the expert,
including the, the then, uh, minister Vivian Nan,
which is the current foreign minister of Singapore.
So they tested it, the, the, the benefits of technology,
and then how they can improve the technology.
Okay? So with that, I, I will just play this video so
that you can see how really Singapore
are serious about this, uh, development.
Okay?
Uh, when we kick started this project, our initial goals
and objective is to how to use autonomous systems
to improve people's life.
Yeah. And also, another of our goals is how do we use this
autonomous systems to create a new industry?
So we kick started with small vehicles.
First of all, what we have done is, uh, we have, uh, tried
to customize the vehicles to be drive by wire capable.
And, uh, we've sensor integrations.
And, uh, then we start to develop the perceptions
that's been the needs to understand the world.
And, uh, we start to do localizations.
The vehicle need to know where am I?
This is a small robots that, uh, tries to
represent a child.
So he is able to detect as at a very far distance,
we are stopping and see what is the situation proceeds
what we, not only that we are detecting the vehicles in
front, but we are detecting vehicles
behind whether there's vehicles, uh, coming towards us
before we do a lane change.
If there is vehicles behind us, we also do a stop.
Also, what we are doing right now is that, uh,
we are detect detecting where is the curb?
Where is the lane you are even able
to classify which lane are we right now?
Are we at the double double lane zone, pedestrian detected,
stopping pedestrian ahead
All? So you see
that it's the, the power of technology.
So they utilizes this smart system into vehicle,
making it an autonomous vehicle.
All right? So another context that they, uh, utilizing
or advancing here is the eHealth.
So how technology can fuse to healthcare.
So, uh, in Singapore, one of the, uh, the problem
that the country facing is the aging population.
So those, uh, group or
or sector of the society as they age, okay?
So they have this, uh, some sort of, uh, uh,
sickness called dementia, okay?
So technically dementia is the degradations of, uh,
the brain health itself.
So why it happened.
So normally based on research in Singapore, they say one
of the cause of dementia is, uh, loneliness
and lack of, uh, interaction with the community.
So because your brain become more stagnant, okay?
So therefore you becoming more
and more less engaged, okay?
Isolated, then it has a, a greater impact
to your brain activity, which leads to dementia.
So in Singapore to address that issue, okay?
So they employ technology to engage this aging population
to make them, again, active, active in terms of thinking,
in terms of mobility, okay?
Because they, they, they want this, uh, group of people to,
to, to enjoy life, to the fullest, meaning
to extend their life at least, and, and enjoy those period.
So in, in Singapore, they have this, uh, digital,
uh, assistant, okay?
Which I will be shown later. Okay?
So I think, wait, let me check. Okay?
So this is what I am talking about earlier.
So they have this center for healthcare, assistive
and robotics technology.
So they develop this robot
and, uh, provides some, uh, a more, uh,
engaging, uh, experience to this aging population.
So from there, they, they, they see that the effects
of dementia, though it is not, uh, significantly meaning
to say it is not reduced, but at least gradually improving.
And then those aging population that are not yet subjected,
meaning still showing, uh, a sign of dementia, uh, the, uh,
the symptoms have been reversed
because the, this group of people, uh, feel that they are,
uh, still have worked, okay?
And then they, they feel, uh,
that they still have something to do, okay?
They, they feel happy about what they're doing.
So, so the, the, the symptoms have been reversed. Okay?
So I have this video, okay, from the, uh, uh,
salvation Army Singapore.
So they, they show how this technology g
improve the, uh, healthcare of this, uh,
society, group of society.
Okay?
Warm,
You.
Thank you.
Alright. So you see the, uh,
robotics technology, D right?
So it creates a more engaging activity
experience to this, uh, aging population, which, uh,
uh, creates a more happy environment, right?
For this, uh, aging people,
because we know as we age, we become more and more emotional
because of lack of, uh, we call it interaction with them,
but with the technology.
D dixie. So Dixie, uh, interact with them
by singing, okay?
Do some, uh, physical activity, right?
So that's why technology, uh, is a great help, okay?
To extend our life, right?
And then also, if you see, uh,
this technology is also used in the field of healthcare.
So this is part of overall, uh, holistic development
of smart ct, because they manage the resources, okay?
So this includes our wellbeing, okay?
As part of the, uh, considered resource in the city.
Okay? All right, so let's go to the agriculture.
So in the smart farms.
So in here, so you also employ technology to monitor your,
uh, resources in the farm.
So these are the machines in truck tour, right?
And then the farmers, okay?
And then the, the animals in the farms itself.
So you could see where are they? So where are my cows?
Are they eating well? Okay?
Are they having, uh, symptoms of pregnancy?
Are they having some, uh, viral infection?
I, the, the system will tell you all of this, okay?
So with the technology, so it prevents, uh, loss
of your cartels, right?
So we, we can do what we call a preventive, uh, measure,
so we can isolate them so that, uh,
the other cartels will not be infected as well, right?
Otherwise, all of them will get infected.
Then later on, it'll be more, uh, cost on the farm
or on the operator
because, uh, they, they need to hire a vet for all
of those infected.
So, which is already, uh,
scattered, right?
But with the technology, you can employ segregation
and you monitor what is happening to them, okay?
And then also aside from that, okay, Singapore as a small,
small country, so they have limited, okay,
land resource, okay?
And then since they are limited in land resource,
so they cannot have this, uh,
agricultural farm, okay?
So they cannot have that.
Instead, what they are trying to do is to use technology
to produce at least a portion of that, okay?
To, to, to at least augment to their food supply.
So they employ, uh, some sort of, uh,
smart technology in agriculture.
So, for example, if they want to produce a, uh, a variation
of, uh, specific, uh, let's say lettuce.
So there are study that the lettuce is, uh, produce is,
uh, affect, uh, uh, affected by the environment.
So let's say if you want to have a more, uh,
crunchier letter, so you have to use specific types
of light, okay?
So to LED, light signal, spectrum, light spectrum.
So if you want to use a, a specific spectrum,
then the lettuce will be more sweet than normal.
So they utilize that
because if, if it is in, in, in the normal farm,
so they use the la the light of the sun, right?
And the light of the sun have scattered spectrum.
So kala, so Hindi uniform.
But if you put that one in a control environment
and use a concentrated spectrum,
then your lettuce will grow depending on
that light spectrum that you use.
So if you want to have a more crunch air, uh, lettuce,
so you will use a speci specific type of, uh, LED, light,
light spectrum, right?
So in the field of science, so technically they use science
to develop specific, uh, type of produce.
'cause it depending play.
And if the client wants to have this kind of produce going
to use specifics, then you need to create an environment
to develop that kind of produce.
Okay? In Singapore, they employing that, okay?
So they have this, uh, technology
and employ all of this to create something, uh, that, uh,
the clients will buy, right?
Let me play this video so
that you could see what I'm talking about.
Within the facility, we have got different sensors
that are operating all the time,
24 hours, they all go back to cloud.
So that gives us cont, that gives us data.
And then we are able to look at temperature, humidity,
light levels, CO2 levels, fertilizer, uh, ECPH,
all the different parameters as required for the vegetables.
Grow can be calibrated
As a farmer or as an operator.
You have a lot of information sometimes through checking
and analyzing of the water quality and animal health.
We are trying to create a program, a software that will help
to take all this information from a different sources
and put it together and give you a better picture
of your culture condition.
We have so far not really recovered back our cost
because first of all,
we haven't reached the maximum capacity of production.
And the second, uh, the cost
of doing this business in Singapore is much,
much more higher than any other place.
And for the agriculture
and aquaculture industry, the resources are very limited.
For example, if my pipe broken, I want
to buy certain pipe in Singapore, it's not available.
I am really seeing some startups in Singapore,
in the ugly food tech space.
They are really exporting some
of their technology equipment overseas.
So Singapore is ranked number one in, uh,
food security index.
So when we export something
and it's related to food,
I believe the world would, uh, feel safe.
All right? So from here you can see that, uh,
Singapore is really investing money,
developing new knowledge, uh, in the field of, uh,
let's say food security in general, right?
So why, why they are doing that
because of the impact of climate change.
So in the future, normal farming
may not work anymore.
Why? Because the climate change
is severe.
What do I mean by that? If it is summer, it is too hot.
So your, your crop will not grow there
because of, uh, lack of water, lack
of soil moisture, right?
And then if it is during the rainy season in the
Philippines, so it'll be flood, okay?
So how will you grow crops there in
that kind of setting?
So if you won't do anything,
any solution on that, then it'll create a food
problem, okay?
So if that happen, then
that will be more problematic, chaotic.
So if you are lazy, you will just think,
I will just buy food overseas.
So that is the context of, uh, importing foods.
But the problem there is that we have a lot
of talents in the Philippines,
so we just need to be more creative.
Why not develop a technology that will
address this kind of issues?
So why not develop a technology that would, uh,
what we called a, a climate resilient technology, which is
employing technology so that we could produce food
regardless of the season, right?
So with that, we can ensure the survival
of the Filipino people through food security, right?
So we have to look into that perspective instead of looking,
uh, I will just buy food from other country
because they can produce it,
because in my country, I cannot produce it
because we don't have, uh, a means to do,
because there is a, uh, a
and we cannot do anything about it, so
that it should not be the thinking.
So we should change the way we think by employing technology
to advance, uh, the, uh, the production to ensure
that there is a sustainable food in our country.
Okay? So aside from that, we,
we also need to look into the waste management.
So as I mentioned earlier, when we develop a city,
we develop community, we develop infrastructure, okay?
They, they need all of these resources, they need food,
they need water, et cetera.
But the byproduct of this is the waste.
So we need to have a technology to ensure
that the waste are properly managed.
That's why I'm, I'm telling you earlier, in Singapore,
they manage it through incineration,
but a different type of incineration.
So they burn all of this underground, okay?
They get the heat convert to energy,
and then the solid waste is utilizes in
construction, okay?
So making it more sustainable, okay?
And then also with the this approach.
So we could have, uh, what we call
collaborative research, right?
So what do I mean by that?
So if we do have what we call a platform, okay, a platform,
for example, uh, uh, let's say, uh, a platform,
let's say created by Ian State University, wherein
researchers from other university
or even from the industry, can, can, can share their,
uh, findings, can share their views
or anything, okay?
Which encourage other people on the same
interests to join forces, right?
And then at the end, they create something like a,
a new idea, which lead to an innovation,
and then, uh, which lead to productization, right?
So then it will have a, a more impact
to the sustainability
and the development of our country in general, Deba.
So that is how efficient collaborative research work
through technology,
because individual, uh,
research, because the more people working on that,
the more heads are there.
So it becomes more, uh, relevant
and more, uh, responsive, okay?
To the, to the needs of the industry or of the community.
So that's how it works.
So if, if it is a, an international context,
the better, right?
Because they, they, they can see other things
that you cannot see, because sometimes your
perspective is in the Philippines.
Other people perspective in India
or in China, in Singapore may compliment each other.
And then you can create a more, uh, conclusive, okay?
Findings or research which will benefit more
the community in general.
All right? So another application, okay?
In the field of wellness. So how, for example,
how well do I sleep?
So in here, so the technology monitors everything, right?
The, the way you, you sleep.
So deep sleep, baan, light sleep, baan, or, uh, whatever.
So it monitors everything,
and then all of this information are being safe.
And then your doctor has a mean to analyze
and provide you some, uh, intervention
or some recommendation to,
to improve the quality of your sleep.
Okay? So basic approach, okay?
All right? As we more
and more engage with technology, so
sometimes I tell them technology knows
us more than we do ourself, okay?
Because technology knows
that we eat more than the normal, right?
Because technology know that your, your BP increases,
your sugar increases, right?
But ourself, we just ignore it because we don't care, right?
Okay. Or sometimes we care,
but we don't have a means to, to to know the figure, right?
So the technology knows all of this.
They record it, and then they,
they provide some analytics, okay?
And what will be the impact of this
in the coming weeks or months?
Because the impact will not be immediate.
It takes time, okay?
That's why technology know more us than we do
ourselves, okay?
This is the example earlier, the, uh, the applications of,
uh, smart technology to farming.
So from here,
the technology can identify which cattle is pregnant
or having some diseases,
then they can do some sort of an isolation.
So in here, more on preventive, right?
So instead of responsive, okay, the future.
So we have here starting at smart home.
That's why in the university, they teaching smart lab,
smart, uh, smoke detection, right?
Uh, all those basic that we improve that.
So we do have smart grid or smart energy.
And then later on, when we apply all of this, uh,
in a more systematic manner,
it become a smart cities, right?
Butin, you could manage your food resources,
energy consumption, waste management and everything, right?
So all of this in the city and then expanding it more.
So you, you have another layer wherein it can manufacture
the resources that you need.
Okay? So that is the future, okay?
So hopefully in the Philippines, we do have the same
direction, okay?
But of course, with the expert that we have, with the
talented engineers, IT specialist, okay?
And domain expert,
and, uh, fusing all of this with technology, uh, I,
I believe the Philippines will be able to catch up, okay?
It's just a matter of, uh, time.
It's a matter of, uh, uh, change of use. Okay?
So we need to change our view.
We need as an engineer, as an IT expert in the future.
So the thinking must be what solution can we develop
to address this issue in indeed operating the,
so you should think of a solution.
I say as an, as an engineer, as an IT professional,
we always look for a solution, how we can address this issue
so that the next generation will have a better future,
a more, uh, sustainable living.
Okay? Okay.
Another area of the Singapore government is, uh,
in the field of agriculture, okay?
Then the other one is a aquaculture. Aquaculture is farming.
It is farming, but, uh, it is farming of aquatic resources.
Okay? So Singapore is very keen on this
because this is part of their food security matrix,
because as I mentioned a while ago,
Singapore is a small country, okay?
So they cannot have big farm or they cannot do farming here
because it's not practical.
Instead, uh, they, they buy foods from, uh,
other countries, okay?
But it is risky because if they have a conflict with
that country, that country can, can easily,
it is Sabo at Singapore food supply.
So that's why Singapore, uh, employ a, uh, some sort of,
uh, food resiliency.
So one is importation.
The second is that, uh, they, uh, rent a,
a land in a foreign country,
and then they use that portion of land
for their food production.
Okay? So technically they, they do farming there,
and then all the produce there will
be returned to Singapore.
Then the third one, the third, uh,
approach Singapore doing is to develop this in Singapore.
Okay? So that's why earlier you see they do have this
smart agriculture, right?
So they developing technology, they developing technology,
uh, to at least add on to the food matrix
of Singapore, and also to address, uh, climate change.
And then we have the aquaculture.
So aquaculture is fish farming species, not only fish,
but all, uh, food, okay?
From the, uh, the water. Okay?
So Singapore is spending money on that
because they believe that if they develop this, uh,
technology, they, they at least augment 2% of their need.
Okay? Also in Singapore, they have this, uh, one
company, I forget the name.
Uh, they have this, uh, uh, eight story building.
Then, uh, that eight story building is a, a farm.
What they do, they farm there is fish imagina, some building
eight story, eight floor building per, is
that why they do that?
Because they know if they have this technology,
it'll help them to, to be more food resilient, okay?
And add onto the food matrix.
So that's how they look into the future.
But in the Philippines, you cannot see that because of illa.
They have a big sea there.
But what if there is a climate change?
Temperature rises, all the fish go out,
meaning go more north.
Is that so what will happen die,
but in Singapore, they look on the solution.
Okay? So let me play this video so that you can see
how Singapore look into this direction
Is ramping up efforts to advance the country's nascent
to aquaculture sector.
And the aim is to help local farmers breed stronger lines
of fish and fund programs
to better monitor water conditions.
The city state is looking to Australia's best practices
to glean some insights.
And Chloe Chu reports from Perth, Australia.
It's the land of pristine coastlines
and thriving marine biodiversity.
This is a vastly different landscape from Singapore's,
but under the surface lies important
lessons for the island nation.
Good animal husbandry is actually a very key
and crucial part of their, uh, sustainable operations.
Among challenges faced
by the republic's fledgling agriculture sector is the high
fish stock mortality rate senior minister of state
for sustainability in the environment.
Copo Kun says some traditional fish farms in Singapore
report a rate as high as 70%,
And that is very, very high number.
Whereas compared to many of the Australian farms here,
which has good husbandry practices,
their stock losses are typically in
the range of 10% or less.
And I think it, it speaks to the,
how the business itself needs
to actually adopt a science-based approach
to animal husbandry.
Not just to be giving welfare to the animals
that they are growing, but also to make sure
that they preserve their stock capacity.
So, as I say, prevention is better than cure.
It's challenges like this
that brought government officials, business people,
and members of the press from Singapore to both Southern
and Western Australia.
Singapore is looking to its veterinary science experts
to equip local farms with the technical tools
to adopt better fish keeping practices.
The island state is also studying
how Australia uses a nutrient budget to strike a balance
between nutrient content and fish health.
What they have consistently point out is
that if there are too much dissolved nutrients in the water,
it can lead to problems
because it means that the harmful algaes can also grow in
there, and that itself can then threaten the fish stock
by lowering the oxygen content in the water in order
to make sure this whole body of water is sustainable.
Farmers ought to be conscious about how much fish they put
inside, but also how they feed the fish.
And because one farmer's feeding practices can affect
another, sharing the same body
of water legislation may be considered to manage this
and level the playing field.
Given today's nascent sector,
if we do not have some regulations to guide a proper use
of feeding and stocking, it may be difficult
for the industry themselves to self-regulate.
So we will have to think about whether we want
to put some enabling legislation as a form of guide
to the industry to develop themselves sustainably
As Singapore ramps up production of locally grown food.
Dr. Cole says the country will look closer at funding,
water monitoring something the
Australians pride themselves in.
One of the things we learned here is
that they do undertake a more comprehensive set
of monitoring of water quality, including dissolved nitrogen
nutrients, and maybe even other form of parameters.
So we will undertake this study with many
of our technical agencies that incorporate
what the academics
and the scientific community can bring on board as well
to see how we can roll out a, a more comprehensive series
of monitoring regime.
He says, this is where industry players in academia can
work with the government, which could provide
some enabling grants.
The trip organized by the Singapore food Agency comes
as the nation is working to strengthen its food security
by producing 30% of its food locally by 2030.
Chloe, true CNA per.
Alright? So you see from the video, technically
what Singapore wants is to, to provide some sort
of resiliency, uh, so that they can have, uh,
food grown, okay?
In, in Singapore soil, right?
Because they know, uh, relying on import is not sustainable.
Okay? So that is one.
And then also learning from the other countries
who have expertise of this will help them to, to take the,
uh, the role of, uh, rearing all of this, uh,
species in Singapore soil, okay?
By monitoring expansion, the water quality parameters,
the impact to the survivability of the, the species,
the fish, the algae and everything.
So it, it, it implicates the, the growth, okay?
The harvest in general, right?
So with, with all of this, uh, they able to,
to develop a more resilient, uh, aquaculture, okay?
In Singapore, all right?
So this is, uh, just an overview of this as, uh, based on
what I have presented earlier.
So smart technology.
So the backbone of this is the sensing.
Then you have the, uh, embedded solution,
and then you also have the, uh, the software itself, okay?
And then the software is the one that, uh, enabling
or enabling technology for all of those application
because without the software,
so your hardware will not work.
So that's why it is an enabling.
So which develops these area specific application
for smart technology.
That's why you have here smart lighting, smart cars, smart
tagging, smart health, smart infrastructure, all
of these smart you will see hardware involvement,
but also it needs the backbone of the software
to make them more intelligent.
Because without software, they cannot be intelligent.
So that's why the future is a more
multidisciplinary in nature, right?
So that's why when you take up a course in agriculture,
it's a traditional agriculture already
because you have here smart agriculture.
So you have ha to have an idea of technology, how
to make agriculture more relevant
and responsive to the needs
of the current generation, right?
So that is how it'll go in the future.
Later on, I will give you some insight
of the future of jobs.
So smart technology or the iot enabling technology.
So you have identification through the use of the sensors
and you need communication lines
or systems to transmit that data from one point to another,
and then once it reach the computing capability
or the computing storage, so they will do an analysis
and then this analysis create what we call, uh, a services
and, uh, can be used to do some sort
of a prediction, right?
Which are in the form of semantic
or can be lead to a new knowledge
or new field of specialization.
Okay? So that's why iot
or smart system is developing new fields, right?
Developing new, uh, new industry.
Okay? Then who would imagine
that data science will become a science
where in fact data is just a raw right?
And science is an organized knowledge.
So how a raw material become an organized knowledge.
So we don't know, but as we progress, so it becomes
an organized field.
So that's why they call it a data science nowadays,
because they develop something new that they get an,
an insight which develop more innovations
that we have nowadays.
Okay? And then these are just, uh,
historical information about, uh, the, uh, IO ot,
uh, figures.
So this figure shows that in 2003, okay?
So the IO OT is just 0.5 billion, okay?
As compared with the human population in 2 0 0 3,
human population, they say 6.3 billion,
and then IOT devices is 0.5 billion.
Now moving forward in 2020, which is four years ago,
human population is 7.6 billion,
but I OT devices, is there 50 billion.
So imagine how many devices we have per person.
So that was the data in 2020. Okay?
So technically the saying is that, uh,
there are more connected device than people.
So there are more gadget, okay? Than new man.
So that's why in the future, so you have to, to,
to anticipate that technology
or all of these, uh, uh, machines, okay?
Uh, more present
than us human in other places, okay?
That's why there, there is a, uh, a discussion saying that,
uh, with all of this development in technology,
AI will displace us human, okay?
Because there are so predominant in value in other fields.
So I, my opinion here is that AI will be there,
this technology will be there to complement us
and not to replace us.
So we, we need a strong regulations on the use
of this technology to ensure that they are
complementing our limitation,
and still, they are still what we call human in the loop.
Because if we remove human in the loop
and AI become more, uh, supreme than us, then
that will be the start of our extinction,
which I believe we don't want to happen, okay?
Alright. Aside from that, as we become more integrated
with technology, as we become more engaged with this,
so there is another area that we need to look on
the security and privacy, okay?
So engineers
and scientists must be, uh, able
to incorporate security in all aspect of their development.
In the early days. They put security on the last, okay?
They say, I developed the system
that I will consider security,
but nowadays you have to include security before, okay?
The development. And it should be implemented in all stages
of development.
Because once you miss this
and something happened to your system
and the the overall system is compromised, then
that would be a very big issue, okay?
So you have to look into the resiliency of your system,
and then you have to include proper data authentication,
and then you have to limit who can access the system,
and then you have to ensure the privacy of the client, okay?
And then the future prospect, okay?
In terms of, uh, this technology.
So marketing iot represents a tremendous opportunity
for various companies.
And then, uh, based on the technology
and services, so there are more
and more company will be, uh, engaged into this technology,
whether you are in the energy sector, food security,
agriculture, uh, building, infrastructure,
healthcare, they will all engage into this
because they see the benefits
and the advantage of this technology in their respective
services that they may provide to the clients, okay?
And the number of connected devices will be
still growing, okay?
Uh, the, uh, number of devices is, uh,
enormous, okay?
From the current population, okay?
So that is how technology will be moving on in the future.
Therefore, uh, some countries
leveraging on this will be more and more smart.
So that's why we, we need to ensure that we able to
address that gap, okay?
Especially in the Philippines, we cannot stay as
what it is currently.
We have to change, okay?
That's why you see why other country are, uh,
advancing more than we can do because of the mindset, right?
So we have to change the mindset, all right?
So this is just an historical data just for you
to see the growth of the technology, right?
So the internet users in billion, okay?
And then, uh, prominent companies employing, uh,
smart system, including artificial intelligence, uh,
and intelligence system.
Okay? So internet of everything will be there, okay?
In the next 50 or even a hundred years, okay?
It just varies on their, uh, levels of engagement.
Okay? So the number of devices will be, uh,
triple, okay?
They, they projected that, uh,
in 2025, okay?
So there will be 200 billion of units, okay?
From Intel alone, okay?
And then for IDC, there are 212 billion units.
So add up all of those technology.
They will outnumbered us human in the planet, okay?
Another opportunity to look into that is to how to
manage all of this technology waste.
Okay? So you have to look on that, yeah.
Because it is an opportunity for us to, to, uh,
leverage on, okay?
So the growth of things, uh, just again,
you see the blue one number of human or people on earth,
or sorry, the yellow one is the people on earth.
Then the blue one is the iot or the technology.
Now it keep changing. Okay? So moving on.
So 2020, the billion, okay? 50 billion of things.
So that's why I say there are more things than us, okay?
Than you one, right?
So this is the pyramid that I want to share
to you also as we progress
human civilization, you see here.
So the data are, as I mentioned, raw, very low,
so meaning less important,
but as you organize them, it becomes an information.
And if this organized information able
to address certain question, it becomes knowledge.
And if this knowledge creates what we call, uh, an insight,
it becomes an understanding.
And if this understanding become an organized
field, it become a wisdom.
Okay? So that is how, uh, they,
they say the new oil is the data, right?
Because it develops a new field,
it develops a new understanding, a new wisdom, a new field
of specialization that will help human civilization
to progress in the coming years, right?
And then for the future of jobs, so I already finished
with the, the smart system.
So as we move on, okay?
With all of these changes in technology adoption,
technology fusion.
So we need to develop a, a resource,
a human resource, or a talent
or an expert professionals in those fields.
So the future will also change.
So the traditional field, such as, for example, you are a,
uh, a person working in the traditional
marketing, okay?
Wherein you are using the traditional approach in the
future, this field will come.
Why? Because of the introduction of digital marketing
and introductions of, uh, intelligence solution, right?
So you, uh, usage
of large language model to to, to,
to develop new insight.
Okay? So, so you don't need those traditional activities
because systems or the AI will do that for you, Eva.
So we, we need to reinvent ourself.
So as the, the industry change, there are also needs
for those new roles.
Okay? So you need data engineer, data scientists, eva, ai,
uh, professional.
And then civil engineers may also change some of their,
uh, area.
So they may include ing, smart building,
twin, twin tower concept, the bio simulation,
which will help them to be more responsive than the need
of the, the specific fields
that they have or of the industry.
So there are so many new things are coming,
so promising and changes.
Although in ma trabajo, per, they, they need to catch up.
'cause that is how industrial revolution works.
Most of the time. The changes provides more opportunity,
provides more, uh, incentives, okay?
To the current and to the future generation.
All right? So how does the future of jobs looks like?
Okay? So I have here a short video
how the work would look like in 2030.
So in here, you will see how AI will become part
of our system, how virtual reality,
augmented reality will help us in, in some
of the industries in terms of, uh, user experience, in terms
of, uh, uh, insight development.
Okay? So you can see from here, okay?
So let me play this video so that you can see what the,
the work okay in 20 20, 20 30 would look like.
The world will look very different by 2030
in a new report tech in 2030,
global data looks at the future of work
and finds disruptive technologies
and social movements will transform the future of work
by 2030, the four day work week will be widespread,
but not ubiquitous.
Calls for a four day work week have strengthened
in the last two years.
This shift will be led by companies rather than governments
as they compete for talent.
Automation will support but not displace jobs.
Artificial intelligence and robotics are the technologies
that will drive automation.
The trend is clear. In the next few years,
even the most senior roles will employ
technological augmentation.
By 20, 30 few jobs will have been fully displaced
by technology, but a new class of jobs will have emerged.
Those required to manage
and oversee automation technology,
potential job titles include robot handler
or AI director offices will move into the metaverse
ar vr, digital twins, ai 5G
collaboration tools and wearable tech will drive the shift.
Metaverse workspaces will allow socialization
with colleagues, project collaboration
and gamified learning activities while working from
home in 2030.
The world and its people won't be the same.
Alright? So you see from the, the video.
So the future of jobs by 2030 as,
uh, uh, presented here will be different, okay?
Because they employ technology in various sector
of the industry, and mostly seniors in that time
are those current middle managers that we have now.
So they will become more technology savvy, more, uh,
technology dependent, uh, professionals.
So that's why, uh, the future will be more
different from what we have now.
Okay? All right.
So as I mentioned, new jobs will be developed, okay?
Replacing those olds
that are not anymore relevant to society.
So that's why my advice here to the younger generations,
to the future, engineers, architects, urban planner,
technologies, agriculturalists,
and all other fields, reinvent yourself.
Okay? So reinvent yourself and make yourself relevant
and competitive to the industry.
Look beyond the Philippine shore.
See what the need, the, the future needs. Okay?
So that's how to ensure our survival.
Otherwise, we are just repeating and repeating
and repeating, okay?
And then this kind of, uh, mentality
might not ensure our competitiveness in a global stage.
Okay? So we, we need to change, we need to look
beyond the Philippine shore, okay?
So in, in, in my, uh, this slide,
you can see there are new rules, cloud engineer, right?
Which is not yet a, a job before ang.
And then you have here, uh, digital marketing, okay?
And then AI engineer, data engineer, okay?
So engineering might change, okay? Slightly right?
Aside from the current fields that they have.
And then they, they will also infusion of some technology,
as I mentioned a while ago, okay?
And then as the jobs are evolving, okay?
So other areas will be coming in.
So technology
and, uh,
digital transformation will be coming into
the picture, okay?
And then, uh, bear in mind,
as we become more engaged in the digital infrastructure,
okay, digital transformation, uh, there is another jobs
that are coming in, Yung, Yung Cybersecurity.
So these are, uh, the professionals protecting
our digital version.
So they are the one, uh, protecting our data,
protecting our infrastructure from those, uh,
cyber criminals, okay?
Because the cyber criminals exploits our data, okay?
That causes us harm, Eva.
And then, uh, these people, uh,
we call it a more, uh, requires more,
uh, skills, okay?
And then, uh, a more, uh, mature, okay?
Because, uh, working into this field is not a joke.
It is really, uh, a matter of,
uh, dedication.
It is really a matter of, uh, uh, presence of mind in trying
to solve the issue, okay?
You cannot have a mentality of, uh, blaming your team.
You need to look for a solution
because, uh, the key here is the data.
And then once the data is compromised, it might lead
to the disadvantage of your company, okay?
And in greater extent, legal battles later on,
because the other company may sue you
because of your negligence in protecting their data, right?
So you see, so the, this is how, uh, cybersecurity, uh,
professionals are really, uh, subjected
to this kind of, uh, thing.
Okay? So, okay, I won't play this. I will play.
All right? Okay, so for the last line, okay.
So all I can say is that, uh, we need to build a,
a more connected future, meaning to say,
connecting the present to the future.
So we, we need to have a, uh, future, okay?
That are responsive to the needs. Okay?
And in, in general also, the future will always be uncertain
because we don't know what will be in the future,
but with the latest technology, we can have a glimpse of
that possibility or an insight.
And then, uh, as an engineer, as a scientist,
okay, we need to think outside the box.
Okay? We need to think critically, rationally,
and science-based, okay?
Approach is the, this, the key
to be future ready, professional.
So we need to have a solid base of all of this.
We cannot just say based on my guts,
based on what I've heard.
So all of this must be based on science,
based on rational, uh, thinking, okay?
Only then we could have this, uh, what we call
a more responsive, a more critical workforce,
and soon to be leaders in the industry.
So with that, I think, uh, that's it.
Thank you and have a great day.